<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
 "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xml:lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en">
<head>
  <title>Acknowledgments</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet"
        type="text/css"
        href="css/style.css" />
  <link rel="stylesheet"
        type="text/css"
        href="css/media.css" />
</head>
<body>
  <div id="acknowledgments" class="element element-non-bodymatter element-container-single element-type-acknowledgments element-with-heading">
    <div class="heading heading-container-single heading-size-medium heading-format-reduced heading-alignment-flexible heading-without-image">
      <div class="heading-contents">
        <div class="title-subtitle-block title-block-without-element-number">
          <div class="element-number-block">
          </div>
          <div class="title-block">
            <h1 class="element-title case-upper">ACKNOWLEDGMENTS</h1>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="text" id="acknowledgments-text">
      <p class="first first-in-chapter first-full-width">So many people have helped directly or indirectly with this book:</p>
      <p class="subsq">I owe a great deal of thanks to my former developer peers, managers, and mentors I’ve been lucky enough to work with throughout my career. While software engineering can be done alone: I’ve always found that it’s both more interesting, and more exciting to do it with a team. I’ve learned the most while working shoulder-to-shoulder with other people, solving challenging projects. If I’ve worked with you in the past: thank you. One or more of our interactions directly or indirectly might have just made its way into this book!</p>
      <p class="subsq">A shoutout to people I spent extended time with at Sense/Net, Scott Logic, the TEXAS team at JP Morgan, Skype London (Durango / Xbox One, Outlook.com and Skype for Web), Skyscanner (TripGun and TravelPro), and at Uber (PPP, Helix, RP, Payments and Money).</p>
      <p class="subsq">Thank you to the early reviewers of the book: Anton Zaides, Basit Parkar, Bruno Oliveira, Cecilia Szenes, Chris Seaton, Giovanni Zotta, Harsha Vardhan, Jasmine Teh, John Gallagher, Katja Lotz, Luca Canducci, Ludovic Galibert, Martijn van der Veen, Michael Bailey, Modestas Šaulys, Nielet Dmello, Oussama Hafferssas, Radhika Morabia, Rodrigo Pimentel, Simon Topchyan, Stan Amsellem and Yujie Li.</p>
      <p class="subsq">A special thanks to my editor Dominic Gover and his tireless work to get this book even more enjoyable to read.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Finally, thank you to my family for supporting the writing of this book and the long hours and weekends that came with it. And to my parents for their ongoing support and advice, and their cautioning on spending too much time writing this book – which I did in the end, anyway.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
