<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
 "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xml:lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en">
<head>
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet"
        type="text/css"
        href="css/style.css" />
  <link rel="stylesheet"
        type="text/css"
        href="css/media.css" />
</head>
<body>
  <div id="introduction" class="element element-non-bodymatter element-container-single element-type-introduction element-with-heading">
    <div class="heading heading-container-single heading-size-full heading-format-full heading-alignment-flexible heading-without-image">
      <div class="heading-contents">
        <div class="title-subtitle-block title-block-without-element-number">
          <div class="element-number-block">
          </div>
          <div class="title-block">
            <h1 class="element-title case-upper">INTRODUCTION</h1>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="text" id="introduction-text">
      <p class="first first-in-chapter first-full-width">This is the book I wish I could have read early in my career as a software developer; especially when I joined a larger tech company for a healthy pay rise, and found a very different engineering culture with surprisingly little guidance for navigating my new environment.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>This book follows the structure of a “typical” career path for a software engineer, </b>from starting out as a fresh-faced software developer, through being a role model senior/lead, all the way to the staff/principle/distinguished level. It summarizes what I’ve learned as a developer and how I’ve approached coaching engineers at different stages of their careers.</p>
      <p class="subsq">We cover “soft” skills which become increasingly important as your seniority increases, and the “hard” parts of the job, like software engineering concepts and approaches which help you grow professionally.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>The names of levels and their expectations can – and do! – vary across companies.</b> The higher “tier” a business is, the more tends to be expected of engineers, compared to lower tier places. For example, the “senior engineer” level has notoriously high expectations at Google (L5 level) and Meta (E5 level,) compared to lower-tier companies. If you work at a higher-tier business, it may be useful to read the chapters about higher levels, and not only the level you’re currently interested in.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Naming and levels vary, but the principles of what makes a great engineer who is impactful at the individual, team, and organizational levels, are remarkably constant. No matter where you are in your career, I hope this book provides a fresh perspective and new ideas on how to grow as an engineer.</p>
      <h2 id="subhead-1" class="section-title subhead keep-with-next paragraph-follows case-upper">HOW TO READ THIS BOOK</h2>
      <p class="first first-after-subhead">It is composed of six standalone parts, each made up of several chapters:</p>
      <p class="subsq"><a class="content-external-link" href="part-001.xhtml">Part I</a> and <a class="content-external-link" href="part-006.xhtml">Part VI</a> apply to all engineering levels, from entry-level software developer, to principal-and-above engineer. <a class="content-external-link" href="part-002.xhtml">Part II</a>, <a class="content-external-link" href="part-003.xhtml">Part III</a>, <a class="content-external-link" href="part-004.xhtml">Part IV</a>, and <a class="content-external-link" href="part-005.xhtml">Part V</a> cover increasingly senior engineering levels and group together topics in chapters, such as “Software Engineering,” “Collaboration,” “Getting Things Done,” etc.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>This is a reference book you can return to as you grow in your career. </b>I suggest focusing on topics you struggle with, or the career level you are aiming for. Keep in mind that expectations can vary greatly between companies.</p>
      <p class="subsq">In this book, I’ve aligned the topics and leveling definitions to expectations at Big Tech and scaleups. However, there are topics that are also useful at lower career levels which we dive deeper into, later in the book. For example, in Part V: “Reliable Software Systems,” we cover logging, monitoring, and oncall in-depth, but it’s useful – and often necessary! – to know about practices below the staff engineer level. I suggest using the table of contents by topic, as well as by level when deciding which chapters to prioritize.</p>
      <p class="subsq">And now, let’s jump in…</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
