<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
 "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xml:lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 3: Performance Reviews</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet"
        type="text/css"
        href="css/style.css" />
  <link rel="stylesheet"
        type="text/css"
        href="css/media.css" />
</head>
<body>
  <div id="part-1-chapter-3" class="element element-bodymatter element-container-single element-type-chapter element-with-heading">
    <div class="heading heading-container-single heading-size-full heading-format-full heading-alignment-flexible heading-without-image">
      <div class="heading-contents">
        <div class="title-subtitle-block title-block-with-element-number">
          <div class="element-number-block">
            <div class="element-number case-upper"><span class="element-number-term">CHAPTER</span> <span class="element-number-number">3</span></div>
          </div>
          <div class="title-block">
            <h1 class="element-title case-upper">PERFORMANCE REVIEWS</h1>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="text" id="part-1-chapter-3-text">
      <p class="first first-in-chapter first-full-width">For many professionals at large companies and some startups, performance reviews are a significant and sometimes stressful exercise. They determine bonuses and eligibility for promotion. They’re also that rare time when you’re rated according to a quantitative system.</p>
      <p class="subsq">The good news is there is almost always plenty you can do to achieve better performance review results! However, there’s little you can do at the last minute, which means advance preparation is important. In this chapter, we cover:</p>
      <ol>
        <li><a class="content-external-link" href="part-001-chapter-003.xhtml#subhead-1">Start early: gather context and set goals</a></li>
        <li><a class="content-external-link" href="part-001-chapter-003.xhtml#subhead-2">The power of habit</a></li>
        <li><a class="content-external-link" href="part-001-chapter-003.xhtml#subhead-3">Before the performance review</a></li>
        <li><a class="content-external-link" href="part-001-chapter-003.xhtml#subhead-4">The performance review</a></li>
      </ol>
      <h2 id="subhead-1" class="section-title subhead keep-with-next paragraph-follows case-upper">1. START EARLY: GATHER CONTEXT AND SET GOALS</h2>
      <p class="first first-after-subhead">Every company is different. What’s important in your workplace, and what is rewarded? How is impact measured? Answers to these questions and others differ wildly at a seed-stage startup versus at a Big Tech giant.</p>
      <p class="subsq">A crucial starting point is figuring out the context in which you need to succeed. Determine which goals are helpful for you, your team, and the company.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Identify</span> and understand the most important factors</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">What things do your team and employer care about most? People who typically achieve outstanding performance reviews and promotions help the business achieve success or hit very ambitious goals. How can this be you? It begins by understanding what’s valued, which means identifying what matters first:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Ask your manager. </b>An obvious place to start. Ask what the team’s goals are, and how they tie into company goals. Ask about your manager’s personal goals, and what’s important to them. The more you can help with this, the more valuable you’ll be to your manager and the team.</li>
        <li><b>Ask tenured people on your team. </b>Talk with experienced teammates and ask what they see as important team and company goals.</li>
        <li><b>Listen to the company’s leaders and executives. </b>Better-run companies are clear about their goals at the corporate and organizational levels. Finding out the most important priorities is usually as simple as attending all-hands meetings, re-watching recordings of meetings and presentations, or reading emails from the leadership that explain priorities. In Big Tech, you might have to listen to several all-hands at your organization’s level, the product org, the parent organization, the tech organization, etc.</li>
        <li><b>Ask people with influence. </b>Seek 1:1s with colleagues who play key roles in the business and are also accessible. They could be your product manager, your skip-level manager, a business stakeholder, or others.</li>
        <li><b>Understand how the performance review system works. </b>There are a few common systems for performance reviews. However, there’s lots of variety in how these work, while better companies refine their systems to fit evolving needs as they grow.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">What performance review</span> system is in place?</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">These are the most common performance review systems:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Unstructured/ad hoc. </b>Managers do performance reviews but with no real structure or cadence. Every now and then, your manager might give some feedback, typically when pay rises are announced. This is a common setup at smaller companies, where performance reviews matter less. The upside is you don’t need to worry much, and it doesn’t consume much time. The downside is that your rating pretty much rests on your manager’s personal opinion of you.</li>
        <li><b>Manager-only input and feedback. </b>This is more structured. For example, there might be a lightweight expectations document for your role. The review itself consists of your manager giving feedback. With this system, it’s important your manager knows about your work. You’re also likely to achieve better reviews by having a good relationship with them.</li>
        <li><b>A peer feedback-based performance review process. </b>There’s a regular process for team members to give feedback on some peers, which the manager reviews. They deliver feedback about you with a rating. In this system, your relationship with your peers is influential in getting a decent review – or not.</li>
        <li><b>A formal, heavyweight process. </b>Much of Big Tech and several later-stage startups run a more heavyweight process to counter common biases. In a typical setup, you write feedback for your peers, produce a self-review, and your manager compiles a written review based on the inputs. An upside of this process is that you typically get specific feedback. A downside is the amount of time and effort it takes.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">Gather these important details about your performance review:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Who makes the final decision? </b>It will almost certainly be your manager, but it’s worth clarifying this.</li>
        <li><b>Who has major input in your performance review? </b>Based on how the system works, it may be peers and stakeholders who have meaningful input, or only your manager.</li>
        <li><b>When does the review happen? </b>What are the key dates? For organizations with structured processes, there’s typically a deadline by which peer reviews and self-reviews are due, a timeframe within which calibrations happen, and a time when outcomes are communicated.</li>
        <li><b>Advice to ensure a fair performance review. </b>Talk with tenured peers within your team, and outside. They’re likely to have tips about what can help or hinder a fair review.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Discuss</span> your goals with your manager</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Set goals based on all you learn about the wider context. Some should support team and company goals – and perhaps your manager’s, too. And of course, they should help you.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Share your goals with your manager and ask for feedback. If you have a mentor in the organization, share them with this person, too; what do they think, which goals do they like best, what’s missing, and what suggestions do they have?</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Agree</span> on goals with your manager</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">One of the best ways to get your manager on-side is for them to endorse your goals. Therefore, iterate your goals to the point where your manager can support them and make sure your goals are recorded.</p>
      <p class="subsq">If you achieve every goal, it may be a good opportunity to ask your manager how they rate your performance. However, be aware that a responsible manager cannot say, “if you do X, you’ll get an above-average performance review.” It just doesn’t work like this because performance reviews are compiled by comparing your results and outputs with teammates’, usually on a calibration. Your manager cannot predict how colleagues will do, nor how the calibration will go.</p>
      <p class="subsq">A fair question to ask your manager is whether your goals would help you meet expectations, or to stretch yourself and exceed expectations at your level. You won’t get any guarantees, but there may be some pointers.</p>
      <h2 id="subhead-2" class="section-title subhead keep-with-next paragraph-follows case-upper">2. THE POWER OF HABIT</h2>
      <p class="first first-after-subhead">Performance reviews typically happen once or twice a year, but your daily work is important all year round. There are easy ways to ensure a fair performance review, which take little time and effort, such as:</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Record</span> your wins</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Most performance reviews suffer from recency bias. When review time arrives, you and your manager most easily recall the most recent successes and results. Conversely, some great work from months ago could be overlooked.</p>
      <p class="subsq">To counter this, record your wins as they happen, for example, weekly or bi-weekly. Capture projects you complete, and take screenshots of praise for your work in emails or chats, and other evidence that speaks to your performance.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Keep</span> a work log</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">This is an easy way to keep track of the good work you do – not only the wins. I’ve observed most people who follow this method use a living document, in which they record notable work, add links to relevant pages, and record the impact of their work. We covered the benefits of a work log – and shared an example – in <a class="content-external-link" href="part-001-chapter-002.xhtml">Part I: Owning your career</a>.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Share progress</span> with your manager</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Hold regular 1:1 catch-ups with your manager every few weeks, to share work you’ve been doing, discuss wins and challenges, and show you’re managing things effectively.</p>
      <p class="subsq">As a manager, I was regularly surprised by how much work my colleagues did that I didn’t know about. This was especially true for more experienced engineers who took plenty of initiative. If they hadn’t shared the details, I would have been unaware; not because I didn’t care, but because I simply didn’t know about it.</p>
      <p class="subsq">For this reason, I suggest erring on the side of oversharing what you do and don’t assume your manager has knowledge of it. A good approach is to share a work log every now and then, and take your manager through everything on your plate.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Get</span> things done</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Most advice is worth nothing if you’re seen as someone who does “busywork” – work that takes effort but provides no real value – or plays politics, but doesn’t get meaningful stuff done. It’s important to ship great work because it builds your reputation as someone who really does “get things done,” and will help you be recognized for this in a performance review.</p>
      <p class="subsq">What great work is depends on your environment. If possible, ensure your work has the right balance of quality and speed. At startups, great might lean towards shipping things quickly, while at larger companies, it might mean well-tested and clean code, or code changes which are straightforward to review, or maintainable solutions.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Get familiar with what great means in your engineering organization, and gather regular feedback from peers and managers for a sense of how your work measures up. When you build a reputation as someone who does great work, others will trust you.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Help</span> others</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">You won’t get far if you only look out for yourself, focus on your own work, and never lift a finger unless it benefits your performance review or promotion case. Most people are observant enough to spot colleagues who are overly self-interested, and may start to dislike you for this, and even claim – justifiably – that you’re a poor team player.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Depending on your situation, it’s good to balance work which helps you, with that which helps your team and company.</p>
      <p class="subsq">So, lend a helping hand when there’s an opportunity; it could be trivial things like doing code reviews, offering to pair up to write code, giving feedback on projects and planning documents, helping with research, offering to do work in an area you’re expert in, unblocking other people or teams, and much more.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Capture work</span> you do to help others</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">A downside of spending too much time helping others is that they get the credit for a job well done, but your manager – and even your peers – might not see your input. Be aware that when you spend a good chunk of time helping others, you might be mistakenly seen as unfocused in your own work, while your contributions elsewhere could go unrecognized.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Principal software engineer Tanya Reilly calls the task of regularly helping your team to succeed, “glue work.” She wrote a thoughtful article about its pros and cons, “Being Glue<sup><a id="part-1-chapter-3-endnote-1" class="endnote-source" href="part-001-chapter-003.xhtml#part-1-chapter-3-endnote-1-text">1</a></sup>.”</p>
      <p class="subsq">My advice is to ensure the meaningful work you do is noticed, at least by your manager. This is when having a work log is helpful. Also, if you notice you’re spending most of your time helping, but very little time on “getting things done,” then you might need to re-evaluate how you spend your time, or your manager’s expectations of your current role and level.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Ask for specific feedback,</span> every now and then</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">A classic way performance reviews go wrong is when a manager gives negative feedback on something that happened months ago. As engineers listen to this bad news, they’re likely to be fuming and wondering, “why didn’t you tell me this earlier?”</p>
      <p class="subsq">I believe managers owe it to their reports to share feedback as soon as possible. However, you can’t control how your manager behaves. Also, a performance review may not be the best setting to call them out for not notifying you earlier. What you can control are your actions.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Seek feedback from your manager and peers well ahead of a performance review. Do this as early as possible to avoid unpleasant surprises at the review. Good feedback is timely, specific, and actionable. In order to gather good feedback, ask for it in advance, focus on specifics, and identify which actions to take based on it.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Here are some situations for getting useful feedback:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Facilitating a meeting. </b>Set up a meeting for your team, and after it’s done, ask a more tenured engineer how they thought the meeting went, and one thing that could have been better.</li>
        <li><b>Resolving an outage. </b>You were in charge of resolving an outage in a system, and think you did a great job. But did you? How about asking your manager and an engineer how it went, and what could’ve been better?</li>
        <li><b>Presenting in front of a larger group. </b>After presenting on behalf of your team at an all-hands, it’s normal to wonder whether it went great or terribly. Why not ask one or two attendees how you did, and what could have been clearer? You could even record your presentation and review your performance for areas of improvement.</li>
        <li><b>Proposing a new initiative. </b>You proposed a new project to the product manager and engineering manager, which was greenlit. Great! But why not ask some people involved in the process how you could have made your case even better?</li>
        <li><b>Leading a project. </b>While leading a project, invite feedback about what team  members like and what’s confusing. After the project’s completed, invite people to share feedback on how you did as project lead and how you could improve, as well as running a retrospective.</li>
        <li><b>Criticizing someone else’s code. </b>A peer puts up a code review with lots of issues. You provide feedback pointing this out. But are you overly harsh, or too soft? Ask an experienced peer what they think of your review’s tone, content, and style.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">You can – and should! – seek feedback when doing something for the first time. This could be a new activity, or working with a new group of people.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Take feedback seriously, but remember that it’s opinion and not a directive. Just because people give you feedback, doesn’t mean you need to act on it. Listen to what they have to say, then figure out if it’s valid. If so, what do you want to change?</p>
      <p class="subsq">Figuring out which feedback to act on and which is redundant is a whole other topic. However, it all starts with feedback, otherwise there is no food for thought.</p>
      <h2 id="subhead-3" class="section-title subhead keep-with-next paragraph-follows case-upper">3. BEFORE THE PERFORMANCE REVIEW</h2>
      <p class="first first-after-subhead">When the performance review date draws near, it often makes sense to spend time on a few activities to ensure a fair review. The more formal the review process, the more time it’s wise to spend on preparation in advance.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">How much can</span> you rely on your manager as your champion?</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">No matter what the performance feedback structure, your manager plays a key role in the feedback process. So try to get a sense of these things:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>What is your standing with your manager, how do they view you, do they think you’re meeting expectations, falling short, or exceeding them? The easiest way to find out is to ask.</li>
        <li>What is your standing within your team and among your peers? Performance reviews can sometimes be comparison exercises. Even if not, your manager will know whom they consider “top performers,” who are “solid performers,” and the few who are “bottom of the pack.” Be honest with yourself; which group do you think you’re in? Don’t expect any decent manager to give a direct answer.</li>
        <li>What is the level of trust with your manager, how much do you trust them, and they you, how many review cycles have you completed together, were there surprises in the past?</li>
        <li>What is your manager’s standing in the organization? How much tenure do they have, and how influential are they within their peer group? The more influential and the longer tenured your manager, the more they can push successfully for their desired outcomes during calibration.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">If you have a new manager, one who doesn’t have much influence or tenure, or one with whom trust is low, then expect it to negatively affect your performance review and prepare for this outcome. You might need to overcompensate and make it hard for your manager to give unfavorable feedback.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Find</span> out the important deadlines</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">What’s the deadline for completing documents, when is the calibration meeting that decides ratings, when’s your manager likely to finalize their preparation? Hint: it will be close to the date of the meeting.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Knowing key dates is critical because it’s pointless to give your manager extra context after decisions have been made. Fill in any knowledge gaps about your contributions before this. Offer your manager a summary of your work which they can use before the performance calibration.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Gather feedback</span> from peers</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">If there’s already a formal process for peers to share feedback, ensure you select colleagues with sufficient context of your work, and who are willing to give feedback. Say you’d be grateful if they took time for this.</p>
      <p class="subsq">If there’s no such process, then you’ll have much less feedback, which isn’t good for your professional growth or for your manager to get a clear sense of you in a team context.</p>
      <p class="subsq">I suggest privately seeking feedback from peers; ask what you’re doing well, and also areas for growth. I strongly suggest writing down what you’re told. Depending on the level of trust with your manager, you could show them this feedback.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Create</span> a self-review</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">You can make your manager’s job easier by handing them a self-review ahead of time. They will have to write up a summary of your work, with feedback on your performance, and might also have to include calibration to justify ratings, as well as compare individuals for the final performance scores. For this reason, provide lots of ammunition for your performance review.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Write up a document, listing:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>The “what.” </b>Results you’ve delivered over time, to help your manager avoid recency biases by including older work. This is where a work log is really useful.</li>
        <li><b>The “how.” </b>Qualitative examples such as helping others, mentoring, pushing for excellence, making pragmatic decisions, etc.</li>
        <li><b>Original goals and outcomes. </b>Reflect on the goals you set and those you achieved.</li>
        <li><b>Examples of competencies.</b> If your organization has competencies listed for your role, show how you fulfill them.</li>
        <li><b>Feedback from peers. </b>If there’s no formal peer feedback process, list some feedback you’ve collected.</li>
        <li><b>Praise and positive feedback. </b>Collect written or verbal positive feedback you’ve received because it’s easy to overlook these interactions. Collecting it will help you and your manager to factor in work where you went above and beyond.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">Two questions to consider are whether to rate yourself in this summary document, and whether you see yourself as meeting, exceeding, or being below expectations. This depends on your own approach and your relationship with your manager; it’s their job to assign a rating, and some people may see it as pushy to rate yourself.</p>
      <p class="subsq">On the other hand, assigning an honest self-review rating is a good thing, in my view. It shows what you truly think of your performance. Plus, your manager will give the rating they want, regardless. Perhaps your own rating will reveal a disconnect between you both. I suggest you write your own assessment of your performance unless there’s a good reason not to.</p>
      <h2 id="subhead-4" class="section-title subhead keep-with-next paragraph-follows case-upper">4. THE REVIEW</h2>
      <p class="first first-after-subhead">Once you’ve submitted documents for your performance review and the process is underway, there’s nothing left to do but wait. This can be an anxious time, especially if you’re focused on getting an above-average performance review, or a bonus. Here are some things that might be worth doing during this period.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Remember</span> performance reviews are snapshots of a point in time</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">The feedback is just one data point. Of course, it feels really important, but in reality it holds little long-term relevance for your career.</p>
      <p class="subsq">I’ve seen people get poor performance reviews and change jobs as a result, who go on to thrive. I’ve also observed people who keep getting amazing reviews but feel trapped in their job, and worry about leaving for a new place where they’d have to start from scratch.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Know</span> the dynamics of the performance review</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">As a rule of thumb, about 20% of people tend to get above-average reviews, 60-70% get average ones, and about 10-15% score below average.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Look around your team and your organization. The chances are, you’ll see many motivated people who all want to achieve a great review. But some will be disappointed in this.</p>
      <p class="subsq">A reliable way to avoid disappointment is to set realistic expectations. Personally, if around 80% of people were expected to get average or better reviews, I tended to ground myself to expect an average review, as long as I knew that I wasn’t beneath expectations, and to treat anything better as a welcome bonus.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Avoid being too</span> dependent on the outcome</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">I’ve observed some people plan how to spend their bonus before it’s been awarded, especially at companies where performance reviews map directly to compensation. But you can’t fully predict performance reviews, nor the size of any bonus. So, I advise against making plans based on an outcome you don’t control.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Biases are very real</span></b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Your colleagues and manager have many unconscious biases, as do you. This matters because your manager’s biases may well play into a performance review. Some common biases which come up during performance reviews are:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Recency bias: more attention paid to recent work</li>
        <li>Strictness bias: excessively demanding when evaluating some team members</li>
        <li>Leniency bias: more leniency than usual for some individuals</li>
        <li>Horns bias: negative feedback from your manager in one area overshadows the whole review</li>
        <li>Halo bias: a single positive event uplifts the whole review. Common when someone is seen to have “saved” a major project</li>
        <li>Similarity bias: your manager gives better reviews to people like them</li>
        <li>Central tendency bias: your manager rates everyone on the team similarly because it feels fairer than to differentiate</li>
        <li>Contrasting bias: your manager keeps comparing you to teammates, not to your role’s expectations</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">Know that not all managers are equally capable of giving feedback:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Few managers are truly great at it. Typically, those who are: they have the experience to give wise feedback, are practiced at doing so and spend considerable time preparing fair feedback.</li>
        <li>Lots of managers are bad at giving feedback. A surprising number of managers have never seen what effective feedback looks like. Many don’t educate themselves on this, or seek feedback before giving their own. Others just don’t prioritize it.</li>
        <li>Most managers are in the middle. They might not have seen what giving effective feedback looks like, but they try to improve. Over time, some of these people become great at giving feedback.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">Once you’ve been through a performance review cycle, you’ll have a sense of which group your manager is in. Don’t forget the outcome also depends on how clearly your manager can articulate their feedback, not only your work.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Be</span> open to negative feedback and don’t dismiss it</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Nobody likes hearing their performance was less impressive than they thought. However, getting negative feedback can be a good thing, as long as it’s specific and actionable.</p>
      <p class="subsq">I suggest pushing back on vague feedback which neglects specifics. Your manager should give feedback that’s specific enough for you to reflect on. However, once you know the specifics, reflect on the message and think about whether you can – or want – to take action.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Remember,</span> you and your manager are on the same side</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Your manager’s interest is to build and operate a high-performance team. The better everyone performs, the better the team works, and the greater the rewards for everyone.</p>
      <p class="subsq">In a healthy setup, your manager gives difficult feedback because they want you to grow, and they trust you to take it in the spirit it’s given. Keep in mind everyone is in the same boat, rowing in the same direction.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Play</span> the long game</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Your career will likely be measured in decades, not by performance review cycles. Whether you get a “meets” or “exceeds” in one cycle is unlikely to have an outsized impact across this timeframe. Instead, the projects you work on, the people you develop strong relationships with, the skills you acquire, and the challenges you tackle, all have more influence.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Don’t forget</span> the big picture</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Individual performance reviews hold little significance in the context of a decades-long career.  Of course, they matter, but adopting a long-term perspective may help you avoid fixating on performance reviews more than they merit.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="fewer-than-100-notes">
      <div class="endnotes">
        <div class="endnotes-separator">
        </div>
        <div>
          <div id="part-1-chapter-3-endnote-1-text" class="endnote-text"><p class="first"><span class="endnote-text-number"><a class="endnote-backlink" href="part-001-chapter-003.xhtml#part-1-chapter-3-endnote-1">1</a> </span>https://noidea.dog/glue</p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
