<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
 "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xml:lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en">
<head>
  <title>Chapter 12: Collaboration And Teamwork</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet"
        type="text/css"
        href="css/style.css" />
  <link rel="stylesheet"
        type="text/css"
        href="css/media.css" />
</head>
<body>
  <div id="part-3-chapter-2" class="element element-bodymatter element-container-single element-type-chapter element-with-heading">
    <div class="heading heading-container-single heading-size-full heading-format-full heading-alignment-flexible heading-without-image">
      <div class="heading-contents">
        <div class="title-subtitle-block title-block-with-element-number">
          <div class="element-number-block">
            <div class="element-number case-upper"><span class="element-number-term">CHAPTER</span> <span class="element-number-number">12</span></div>
          </div>
          <div class="title-block">
            <h1 class="element-title case-upper">COLLABORATION AND TEAMWORK</h1>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="text" id="part-3-chapter-2-text">
      <p class="first first-in-chapter first-full-width">When working alone, coding is almost always the most challenging part of building software. When in a team, working with colleagues can be equally challenging. Many things matter in a collaboration: ensuring the agreed approach is followed, agreeing which coding patterns to employ, how to do testing, which naming conventions to follow, and more.</p>
      <p class="subsq">And when you work as part of a larger group – for example, when several teams build a product – you need to ensure you’re pulling in the same direction as everyone else. This could be making sure a new API endpoint which you expose, works the way another team expects when they use it. Or telling a team that they’re blocking you because they need to make changes to their service.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Communication, collaboration, and teamwork are baseline expectations for well-rounded senior software engineers at most companies. In this chapter, we address the most common collaboration situations and dig into how to excel at them.</p>
      <p class="subsq">We cover:</p>
      <ol>
        <li><a class="content-external-link" href="part-003-chapter-012.xhtml#subhead-1">Code reviews</a></li>
        <li><a class="content-external-link" href="part-003-chapter-012.xhtml#subhead-2">Pairing</a></li>
        <li><a class="content-external-link" href="part-003-chapter-012.xhtml#subhead-3">Mentoring</a></li>
        <li><a class="content-external-link" href="part-003-chapter-012.xhtml#subhead-4">Giving feedback</a></li>
        <li><a class="content-external-link" href="part-003-chapter-012.xhtml#subhead-5">Working with other engineering teams</a></li>
        <li><a class="content-external-link" href="part-003-chapter-012.xhtml#subhead-6">Influencing others</a></li>
      </ol>
      <h2 id="subhead-1" class="section-title subhead keep-with-next paragraph-follows case-upper">1. CODE REVIEWS</h2>
      <p class="first first-after-subhead">A good code review examines a change and how it fits into the codebase. It inspects the clarity of the title and description, and the ”why” of the change. It covers the correctness of the code, test coverage, functionality changes, and confirms everything follows coding guidelines and best practices.</p>
      <p class="subsq">A good code review points out obvious improvements to make, such as hard-to-understand code, vague names, commented-out code, untested code, or overlooked edge cases. It also notes when too many changes are crammed into one review, suggests keeping code changes as single purpose, and breaking down the change into more focused parts.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Better code reviews also look at a change in the context of the broader system, and check that changes are easy to maintain. They might ask questions about the necessity of a change and how it impacts other parts of the system. They look at abstractions introduced and how these fit into existing software architecture. They note maintainability observations, such as complex logic which could be simplified, test structure, duplication, and other possible improvements.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">The tone</span> of the review</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">The tone of voice in speech and writing influences morale within teams. Reviews with a harsh tone create the impression of a hostile environment and can be seen as micro-aggressions. Opinionated language can make people defensive and spark heated discussions. In contrast, a professional, moderate, and positive tone can contribute to an inclusive environment in which people are open to constructive feedback, and code reviews trigger healthy, lively discussion.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Good code reviews ask open-ended questions, over making strong or opinionated statements. They offer alternatives and workarounds that might be superior. These reviews assume the reviewer may miss something, and so seek clarification before making a correction.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Better code reviews are also empathetic. They recognize that the person who wrote the code spent a lot of time and effort on the change. These code reviews applaud nice solutions and are generally positive in tone.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Requesting</span> changes before approving</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Good code reviews don’t approve changes while unresolved questions remain. However, they make clear which questions or comments are non-blocking or unimportant, and often refer to these as ”nitpicks” – or ”nit.” They are explicit when approving a change, such as giving a “LGTM” (looks good to me.) They are equally clear when requesting a follow-up, and use the code review tool or team convention to communicate this.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Better code reviews don’t approve changes while there are important questions that need to be addressed. These reviews are firm on principle but flexible in practice; sometimes, comments will be addressed by the author in a follow-up code change. For urgent changes, reviewers try to make themselves available for quicker reviews.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Talking</span> to each other</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Good code reviews ask as many questions as needed, and if the revision does not address them, a good review will note this. When a conversation turns into a lengthy back and forth, reviewers reach out to the author in person, in order to not use up more time on the code review tool.</p>
      <p class="subsq">The presence of many comments suggests misunderstandings which are easier to identify and resolve by talking things through. Effective engineers know that in-person contact saves time and avoids hard feelings.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Nitpick comments</span></b></p>
      <p class="subsq">“Nitpick” refers to a comment about a minor change that doesn’t significantly impact the quality of the pull request; such as an alternative name for a variable or function, claiming variable declarations should be in alphabetical order, or that indentation could be improved.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Good code reviews make it clear when querying a change is nitpicking and usually don’t contain too many of these. Excessive nitpicking can be frustrating and a distraction from more important topics.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Better code reviews realize too many nitpicks are a sign of a lack of tooling, or standards. Reviewers who come across these frequently will look at solving the problem outside of the code review process. For example, most common nitpick comments can be solved via automated linting. Those that cannot, can usually be resolved by the team agreeing to certain standards and following them, and perhaps eventually automating them.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">New joiners</span> and code reviews</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Good code reviews apply the same quality bar and approach to everyone, regardless of job title, level, or length of tenure. They have a moderate, supportive tone, and are clear which changes they request be made prior to approval.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Better code reviews pay attention to making new joiners’ first few reviews a great experience. They’re empathetic that a new colleague might not know all coding guidelines – especially unwritten, informal ones. Reviewers are also well aware a new joiner is still ramping up with the codebase, and won’t be up to date on which conventions the code follows.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Better code reviews also put extra effort into explaining preferred approaches and offering pointers on where to learn more. They’re positive in tone, celebrating the first few changes to the codebase a new joiner makes.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Cross-office,</span> cross-timezone reviews</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Good code reviews account for timezone differences in distributed workplaces, where possible. Reviewers aim to review code during overlapping office hours when both sides are at work. For reviews with many comments, reviewers offer to chat directly, or on a video call.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Better code reviewers notice when they repeatedly run into timezone issues and look for a systemic solution, beyond the code review framework. Solutions to this kind of problem are often not simple and could involve refactoring and creating new services/interfaces, or tooling improvements. Solving dependencies like this makes life easier for both teams and progress more efficient.</p>
      <p class="subsq">For more advice on how to do good code reviews, see:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Code review developer guide<sup><a id="part-3-chapter-2-endnote-1" class="endnote-source" href="part-003-chapter-012.xhtml#part-3-chapter-2-endnote-1-text">1</a></sup> by Google</li>
        <li>Code review guidelines<sup><a id="part-3-chapter-2-endnote-2" class="endnote-source" href="part-003-chapter-012.xhtml#part-3-chapter-2-endnote-2-text">2</a></sup> by GitLab</li>
      </ul>
      <h2 id="subhead-2" class="section-title subhead keep-with-next paragraph-follows case-upper">2. PAIRING</h2>
      <p class="first first-after-subhead">For a less experienced engineer, pairing is a fantastic way to get difficult things done, learn more, and level up. But pairing is equally useful when you’re more experienced. You will inevitably face situations where you get stuck, and when pairing with someone can help unblock you. Getting stuck is especially common when working with a new codebase or technology. Pairing with experts in that codebase or technology on your team or a neighboring team can help you overcome issues quicker. You also learn from someone else and create stronger professional relationships.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Pairing can be pair programming, or simply pairing up to solve a problem.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Pair programming</b>, when done in person, this usually involves sitting next to each other and working on the same screens, taking turns with the keyboard. In a remote setting, it’s usually done on a call and with screen sharing, or more commonly, with a collaborative editor which you can each input text into, in parallel.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Pairing up</b> means sitting next to each other or whiteboarding when it’s in person. When the pairing is remote, it usually happens on a call with tools like screen sharing or collaborative editing, as needed. I use the term ‘pairing’ for both activities, going forward. Pairing is the simplest, most efficient form of collaboration between two people to solve a problem.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Situations where pairing</span> can be useful</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">For software engineers, these are the most common problems that pairing can solve:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Onboarding to a new team, codebase or system. </b>When new to a team or codebase, hitting the ground running is easier when pairing with someone who goes through key, must-know information, sets up things for the first time, identifies known problems, and so on. It is by far the most common use of pairing.</li>
        <li><b>Implementing a feature.</b> When an engineer is unsure how to implement something, pairing up with a more experienced developer in the domain educates them on how to do it, and gives insight into the more experienced colleague’s thinking.</li>
        <li><b>Debugging a tricky bug.</b> There are times when you cannot figure out why something isn’t working, even though you try debugging the issue in several ways. Pulling in another pair of eyes can be very useful, and the person you pull in doesn’t even need to be more experienced. Often, just explaining what your suspicion is and all the things you’ve tried, can help identify a solution.</li>
        <li><b>Planning and architecting.</b> Before starting to build a complex project involving coding for a few days, it’s smart to talk through your approach with another developer. Sketch out your ideas, tell them approaches you considered but ruled out, and outline how you plan to build, including details about the technology, language, frameworks, and libraries you’ll use, existing components you’ll reuse or modify, the class structure you’ll put in place, and how you’ll test and validate your solution.</li>
        <li><b>Confirming you’re doing things correctly.</b> When you implement a functionality or feature, you might want to talk your approach through with someone and show them the decisions you made. As with debugging, they don’t necessarily need to be more experienced.</li>
        <li><b>Understanding how something works.</b> When working with a new system, service, or component that’s difficult to understand, it can be faster and more educational to pair with someone who is an expert – or who built it! – for a rundown on how things work.</li>
        <li><b>“Cheat” by observing and learning how another developer works.</b> A huge benefit of pairing is that you see how people really work. You talk with them and get a sense of how they think, see their IDE, which shortcuts they use, how they write and test code, and more. Pairing with someone for the first time was often an eye-opener for me, and I “borrowed” tools and approaches I liked.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">Beyond transferring knowledge, pairing also helps build a personal relationship with the engineer you are pairing with. Regardless of who’s more experienced, you’ll learn from each other by solving a problem together.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Approaches</span> when you’re more experienced</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">When you are the more experienced in a pairing, there’s ways to make the session more efficient:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Define the problem. </b>Ask your pair partner to explain the problem they need to solve. There will be times when an engineer comes to you seeking to pair but isn’t clear about what they need help with. The session will be more focused if you start by clarifying this. Is it about getting a basic implementation of a feature running? Is it about helping them understand how a component works? Be specific, and don’t start the session until the topic is clear.</li>
        <li><b>Get a sense of the urgency. </b>There’s a big difference between someone wanting to pair with you to mitigate an outage impacting thousands of customers per minute, versus pairing on a non-time-sensitive matter.</li>
        <li><b>When there’s time pressure, solve first while explaining, then follow up.</b> When time’s of the essence, don’t be afraid to take the lead. Explain what you are doing to solve the issue, and why, and how you verify that your changes work. Once the problem is fixed and there’s no more time pressure, go back and teach the person how to do what you did.</li>
        <li><b>Aim to teach your pair partner something, not just give answers. </b>It is a low-leverage task if you quickly solve your pair partner’s problem as efficiently as possible, then return to your work. Why? Because the next time they have a similar problem, they still won’t know how to solve it and will come back to you. However, pairing becomes a high-leverage activity when you spend time teaching a colleague how to solve the problem. Then, next time they have a similar issue, they can solve it themself.</li>
        <li><b>Avoid immediately giving answers, even if you can.</b> When a developer says there’s a bug they cannot fix that’s driving them up the wall, and you know exactly what the problem is, it’s tempting to tell them immediately. However, do you remember how you figured out the problem, and which approaches you used to rule out other causes? Coach them so they go through the same learning process you did!</li>
        <li><b>Give the other person enough space to talk and type.</b> You’re the more experienced one, and there’s a good chance you can solve the problem faster. But don’t forget that a great pairing session teaches the other person something. So, give your pair room to express their thoughts, and if you start coding up a solution, pass it to them to finish.</li>
        <li><b>Try to learn something from your pair partner. </b>As the more experienced in this pairing session, you might think you’ll teach and lead the session, and have nothing to learn. But this might not be the case! If you coach the other person and ask open-ended questions, they might surprise you with approaches you didn’t think of, or experiences you didn’t know they had.</li>
        <li><b>Give compliments when due. </b>When your pair completes a part of the work well, give them positive feedback. It will mean a lot and reinforce the behavior.</li>
        <li><b>It’s natural to go off-track sometimes.</b> It’s common to get sidetracked when pairing, and veer off from solving the main problem. This can especially happen when there’s no time pressure. This is okay and natural. Pairing is part problem-solving, part learning from each other, and part getting to know someone better. And it’s also fun; so if you get to explore an interesting area, do so.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Approaches</span> when you’re less experienced</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Don’t be afraid to ask someone if you can pair with them! While this feeling is more common for less experienced engineers, I’ve even observed senior engineers worry that asking a staff or principal engineer to pair with them would be an admission that they can’t do the job. But it is not: asking to pair is a great way to get things done quicker and learn.</p>
      <p class="subsq">When you ask someone to pair with you, respect their time and be flexible if they have something urgent to finish. If this person is helpful, thank them for making time for pairing. Consider doing this in front of others. It’s a nice thing to say, and can also encourage teammates to make their own pairing requests after seeing that you did it, and benefited from it.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Pairing is an approach that seems underutilized and undervalued, especially in remote working contexts. I suggest you use pairing to help others around you by offering to help a developer who seems stuck and pairing with colleagues who could unblock you.</p>
      <h2 id="subhead-3" class="section-title subhead keep-with-next paragraph-follows case-upper">3. MENTORING</h2>
      <p class="first first-after-subhead">As a senior engineer, there will be plenty of opportunities to mentor colleagues. It can also be a good idea to have more experienced mentors to learn from.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Informal mentorship</span></b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Mentorship doesn’t need to be formal in order to be a valid learning experience. And mostly, it isn’t formal. Mentoring happens naturally when developers work together and collaborate.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Code reviews, or working on a project in a team, are common cases of informal mentorship. There’s no structure in place; just engineers working together, giving and getting feedback, and learning from each other.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Having informal, 1:1 sessions with other engineers, and simply talking about what keeps them occupied, can also be a kind of informal mentorship – even if doesn’t feel like it! It’s still informative and often provides ideas for different approaches to try.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Formal mentorship</span></b></p>
      <p class="subsq">The rarer form of mentoring for developers is the formal type. This is a setup where a more experienced colleague agrees to mentor a junior engineer, kicks things off, and holds meetings at a regular cadence, helping the mentee grow. But why bother with the effort of formal mentorship, if informal mentoring happens all the time? There are a few reasons:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>You might not be working with experienced enough people and want someone to learn more from.</li>
        <li>A more formal mentoring relationship can help you grow faster and in a more focused way, as you spend dedicated time on professional growth.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">There are two places where it’s easy to get started with formal, focused mentorship: more structured tech companies, and online communities. Some tech companies have mentorship programs, but these are rarely advertised. Uber, PayPal, and Amazon all have internal programs that make getting focused mentorship easy.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Online communities of mentors are also welcoming and easy to get started in. There’s an ever-growing collection of sites: search “developers mentoring other developers,” for resources.</p>
      <p class="subsq">I would have grown faster with formal mentorship during my developer years. For that reason, I made a point of setting up mentoring relationships between less experienced and more experienced engineers on my team, when I transitioned into engineering management. It was no surprise that junior engineers ended up growing faster, as a result. What I didn’t predict was how much senior engineers benefited from formal mentorships with staff or principal engineers.</p>
      <p class="subsq">So, how do you set up formal mentorship? As with any project, a good kickoff helps to get everyone – in this case, the mentor and mentee – on the same page.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Kicking off mentoring:</span> the introductory meeting</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">The best way to start formal mentorship is with a kickoff. I often suggest people approach potential mentors and say: ”You’re someone I look up to. Can I set up a time to talk about areas I’d like to grow in and how you could potentially help, as a mentor?” It’s good to dedicate time to this, share some background, and see if you are each willing and able to commit to mentoring.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Come prepared with a list of topics to discuss at the kickoff, such as:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Background. </b>It’s nice to share backgrounds to “break the ice.”</li>
        <li><b>“What’s in it for me?”</b> What do you hope to gain from this relationship, and how would you like to grow? Ask the other person the same. The best mentorships are two-way relationships, from which both people get something.</li>
        <li><b>Topics to cover.</b> What are you interested in? Where would you like to grow? Is there something more pressing to discuss?</li>
        <li><b>Cadence.</b> How often to follow up, and when? Most developers catch up once every two weeks for between 30-60 minutes, at a time that works for both parties.</li>
        <li><b>Communication between catch-ups.</b> Is the mentor open to random pings? What’s their schedule like?</li>
        <li><b>Short-term wins. </b>What is an area you’d like to grow in during the next month? Start by focusing on that.</li>
        <li><b>Evaluating progress. </b>Which criteria would assess how effective the mentorship is?</li>
        <li><b>Challenges.</b> It’s nice to set these out. For example, it’s okay to share with a would-be mentor that you have no clue how mentoring works. Or your mentor might say they have a crazy next month and will be swamped by work.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">Don’t forget, if you’re asked to be a mentor, it’s always okay to say “no.” As a mentee seeking a mentor, I had several potential mentors politely decline. For some, it was a lack of time, while others felt they didn’t have the expertise I sought. Don’t let rejection derail you; ask for any recommendations they might have for other potential mentors. You’ll find a match sooner rather than later.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">When you’re</span> the mentor</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Here are approaches to being an effective mentor.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Be clear on expectations from the start. </b>Clarify how much time you can commit, and also what you expect from the mentee. If you’d like them to have a list of things to talk through, say so. Keep it casual if that’s your style, and tackle things as they come. Discuss this approach.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Listen to what the mentee has to say.</b> This is the most important role of a mentor. Yes, a mentee wants actionable advice, but talking about what’s going on and how they are feeling is just as important.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Try starting the conversation with questions they can engage with, like ”what’s on your mind?”, ”what are you struggling with?”, ”what are you working on?”, ”what are your goals for the week?” Listen for areas you might be able to help them with.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Avoid serving up answers on a silver platter. </b>Being an efficient mentor is not about solving other people’s problems. It’s about helping them grow so they can solve their own problems. When mentoring, you want to delay sharing solutions for as long as possible.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Instead, ask questions, offer alternatives, and resist telling people what to do. Taking a patient, coaching-first approach empowers junior developers and accelerates their learning.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Discuss specific situations to dive deeper. </b>These can be raised by the mentee, or be things the mentor notices. Topics may be communication, cultural issues, deep technical questions, code reviews, and much more.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Provide context and perspective for specific situations. You’ve probably been in the industry longer and know the situations the mentee is struggling with. If you work at the same company, you probably know how things work a lot better than they do. Reflecting on how you struggled with a challenging situation back in the day, can help the mentee feel less anxious when it happens to them.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Leverage your network to help your mentee. </b>As a mentor, you are usually better connected than your mentee: this is powerful if you work at the same company. When in this situation, you can put your mentee in touch with colleagues who can help. Making introductions and inviting others to spend time with your mentee goes a long way.</p>
      <p class="subsq">If you work at different companies, there might still be opportunities to connect them with others or offer to help with an introduction.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Let your mentee know you’re on their side. </b>People who approach you for mentorship are not only looking for advice but also support. The less experienced they are, the more likely they feel like an impostor, and the more your support can help. Encouraging words go further than you’d think:</p>
      <p class="subsq">Every mentor I worked with ended our conversations with a ”you got this!” or ”you can do this!” or similar. Only words, but damn, they meant the world to me.</p>
      <p class="subsq">More tips on how to be a great mentor:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Aim to learn something new from your mentee. </b>Be curious about the problem they want to solve and understand their viewpoint. Even if you know the right answer, you might learn something new, and see a problem through a fresh lens.</li>
        <li><b>Help mentees come up with multiple solutions to problems. </b>Also, help them articulate tradeoffs. Explain concepts over solutions and help mentees understand solutions are rarely either/or. This is especially true for technical topics and also holds for most non-technical problems.</li>
        <li><b>Tailor your approach for technical vs non-technical topics. </b>Technical questions are usually easier to deal with. You can give mentorship by asking which avenues they’ve tried already, and guide them with questions towards something that works. Listening is key for non-technical topics like communication, conflict, etc.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">When you’re</span> the mentee</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">With a cadence in place and regular catch-ups, how do you keep getting value from a mentorship? I’m a firm believer that as a mentee, you need to invest time and effort in mentorship to get value from it.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Set clear expectations at the start. Come prepared to catch up with your mentor and make good use of their time. Bring challenges, wins, and topics about which you’d like their input. Have a list of topics to discuss. As you get advice and ideas, commit to actions and follow them through. Let your mentor know how it goes.</p>
      <p class="subsq">It can be helpful to keep a running doc to share with your mentor. You can drop notes in it between catch-ups about topics to raise next time, such as:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Key events. </b>Tell your mentor briefly about significant things that have happened. Keep it short.</li>
        <li><b>Reflections on action items / guidance / discussions, from last time.</b> If you did something based on a discussion at the previous meeting, share the results. This is useful for you both.</li>
        <li><b>A current challenge.</b> Describe a challenge you have, talk it through, and brainstorm an approach to solve it.</li>
        <li><b>A recent success.</b> Describe a situation which went well and why it did, asking the</li>
        <li>mentor to share their opinion. Nine times out of ten, their feedback will make you re-evaluate how to handle things.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Long-term benefits</span> of mentoring</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Mentoring offers major long-term benefits for all parties. The software industry is surprisingly small, so the junior person you mentor today, will become more senior over time, and you may reconnect later in a different setting. If you were a supportive mentor, they’ll likely remember this. Who knows how a good relationship may be beneficial at some point in the future.</p>
      <p class="subsq">There’s no one pattern for mentorship. For most people, it’s a mix of informal knowledge sharing and regular catch-ups. Mentees often reach out to mentors with one-off questions. Some prefer in-person mentoring, and other mentorships don’t go beyond the reviewing of code. Every mentoring relationship is different; what’s important is that it works for both mentor and mentee.</p>
      <h2 id="subhead-4" class="section-title subhead keep-with-next paragraph-follows case-upper">4. GIVING FEEDBACK</h2>
      <p class="first first-after-subhead">As a senior engineer, you notice when other developers do great work, and when they could do better. In each case, you can choose to say something, or stay quiet. My take is that it’s a wasted opportunity to not give feedback, as long as it’s done respectfully and with the intent of helping the other person grow.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Better ways to</span> give positive feedback</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Giving positive feedback is easy, right? After all, it’s complimenting someone. But there are ways to make feedback more effective:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Make it concrete. </b>Don’t just say, “good job.” Point out specifics such as, “I liked how you handled all four edge cases in your pull request and wrote tests for all of them. We need more of this kind of thoroughness; keep it up!”</li>
        <li><b>Make it sincere.</b> Don’t fall into the trap of saying nice things you don’t mean. It can work in the short term, but over time people notice insincere feedback. If you think someone did an okay job, don’t tell them it was excellent. Instead, find the detail that was excellent and highlight it. Give constructive feedback on everything else.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Giving</span> constructive or negative feedback</b></p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Ask questions before jumping in with feedback. </b>This is especially true if you’re unfamiliar with the other person’s work, or they didn’t explicitly ask for feedback.</p>
      <p class="subsq">For example, say you notice a pull request from a new joiner is missing unit tests, but the guidelines mandate them. You could jump in and give feedback on the missing tests. However, a better strategy might be to ask: “have you thought about how to test this change?”</p>
      <p class="subsq">Framing it as a question gives them the opportunity to share more context, and also to correct the omission. In the above case, the person might respond in a few ways:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>“Of course. I’m aware we usually do tests, but this is an urgent fix to resolve an outage. The tests are coming in the next pull request!”</li>
        <li>“Wow, I totally forgot. Thanks a lot for asking. Let me do it right now, and I’ll make sure to not miss them next time.”</li>
        <li>“Tests? What tests? I didn’t know you did that here?”</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">Notice the absence of negative sentiment in these responses. That’s the beauty of asking questions before giving feedback!</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Deliver corrective feedback empathetically. </b>Share your observations, then ask questions to guide them to the right conclusion. Once they have it, give positive reinforcement.</p>
      <p class="subsq">The more trust you have with the person receiving your feedback, the more “raw” you can be without offending them. Use your judgment about what’s appropriate. Don’t forget, the goal of feedback is to help the other person improve. As long as you offer feedback that’s encouraging and not discouraging, you help them grow.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Being good at giving feedback is a massive advantage. The single best resource that helped me in this area was these two books:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>“Radical Candor” by Kim Scott</li>
        <li>“Crucial Conversations” by Joseph Grenny, Ron McMillan, Al Switzler and Kerry Patterson</li>
      </ul>
      <h2 id="subhead-5" class="section-title subhead keep-with-next paragraph-follows case-upper">5. WORKING WITH OTHER ENGINEERING TEAMS</h2>
      <p class="first first-after-subhead">There are many reasons why you might work with another engineering team, such as:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Trying to understand code written by – or last modified by – an engineer on another team</li>
        <li>Modifying parts of the code owned by another team</li>
        <li>Having questions about how to use a service or component owned by another team</li>
        <li>Planning modifications to code which another team owns, and wanting to follow</li>
        <li>conventions</li>
        <li>Another team needs to unblock your work on a system they own</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">If your workplace has an internal open source model – meaning you have access to most of the code and can create pull requests for it – then engineers on another team may block your changes when you make a pull request. This is usually because the team owns that part of the code, so it’s wise to consult them before making changes – especially for large teams.</p>
      <p class="subsq">At small companies with a handful of engineers, it’s easy enough to get to know developers and find out what they do. For example, in a workplace with six engineers, including yourself, you’ll know Bob and Suzy are backend, Sam and Kate are web, and Tom is mobile, so you know who to approach for questions. The same goes for a company with five engineering teams: Platform and Core are mostly backend, while Web Core, Customer Support, and Customer Experience are a mix of web, mobile and backend engineers.</p>
      <p class="subsq">However, at companies with more than a dozen engineering teams, it becomes tricky to figure out which ones your team has relationships with. Often, the best pointer for whom to talk to is checking who changed a relevant line of code last time, and reaching out to them.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Draw</span> a map of teams</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Draw up a map of engineering teams connected to your team, and which ones your team has connections with. List:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Engineering teams your team depends on. Teams whose APIs or services your team uses</li>
        <li>Engineering teams that depend on your team. Tip: look through outages that impacted your team, when the change was made by another team. There’s a good chance that is a dependent team</li>
        <li>Teams building similar features with potential for functionality overlap, especially for customers</li>
        <li>Teams on the same screen as your team’s features, if your team owns user interfaces</li>
        <li>Infrastructure teams your team uses, even indirectly</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">Once you have the map, show your peers and managers to find out if there’s any blanks.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Introduce</span> yourself to other teams</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Make yourself known to engineering teams with whom you have a connection. Use the map of teams connected to your own, to meet at least someone on each. You may already be working with some of these teams. But if not, here’s a suggestion; set up a short introduction meeting with an experienced engineer or the team manager. Tell them your goal is to understand a bit more about their team, and to put a face to the name. If there’s relevant documentation, read it beforehand.</p>
      <p class="subsq">At the meeting, introduce yourself and share briefly what your team does and ask the other person about theirs. How long have they worked there, what’s their role on the team, what does the team do, which technologies do they use, and what are their challenges?</p>
      <p class="subsq">The goal of an introductory meeting is two-fold:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Gather information about a team that can speed up your work, later. For example, when planning to build a new feature, you may realize this other team will need to make a change in their system. You could immediately talk to the engineer you know on that team about this.</li>
        <li>Build a personal connection. The larger an organization, the more that personal connections with other teams matter.</li>
      </ul>
      <p class="subsq">Through an introductory meeting, you learn more about another engineering team, which is always interesting! There’s a good chance you’ll learn something new, or get inspired to try a different engineering approach that they use.</p>
      <h2 id="subhead-6" class="section-title subhead keep-with-next paragraph-follows case-upper">6. INFLUENCING OTHERS</h2>
      <p class="first first-after-subhead">As a senior engineer, your “influence” within the team and company matters. The more respected, well-known, or influential you are within a group, the more your voice is heard, and the easier it is to guide things in what you believe is the right direction.</p>
      <p class="subsq">So, how can you become more influential as an engineer? Here are some approaches.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Ship great work</span></b></p>
      <p class="subsq">What “great” looks like depends on your environment. Ensure your work has the right balance of quality and speed. At startups, “great” might lean towards shipping things quickly, while at larger companies, “great” might mean well-tested, clean code, or code changes which are straightforward to review, or maintainable solutions.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Get familiar with what “great” means in your engineering organization, and gather regular feedback from peers and managers for a sense of how your work matches up. When you build a reputation as someone who does great work, others will trust you.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Get</span> to know other people</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Specifically, people outside the engineering organization. Try to make time to break out of your engineering bubble. Talk with product people, colleagues in design, data science, other non-engineering functions, and on the business side.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Do this with the aim of understanding more about the product direction and the business strategy. Consider setting up a regular 1:1 with your product manager – say, once a month – to get a better understanding of what product does, why, and how you can help.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Join calls with engineers on other teams whom you work with. </b>When working in a distributed environment or with remote teams, the chances are that most work is done via emails, chat, documents, and coding.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Don’t keep things fully asynchronous; consider hopping on a video call, to talk “face to face” with colleagues you collaborate with. Make an excuse to talk with someone you work with asynchronously. During the call, try to get to know them better. How long have they been in their team? What other stuff do they work on? What’s going on in their part of the world?</p>
      <p class="subsq">There are several benefits of talking with people, as opposed to just focusing on the work. First, you’ll each get a feel for who’s behind those emails and pull requests. Second, you’ll gather a lot more context about how they work. Finally, you might make an unexpected connection, via similar views, personal interests, or something else.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">Take</span> part in cross-functional projects</b></p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Get involved in RFCs / design docs / cross-team planning. </b>If your company utilizes RFCs, design docs, or ADRs, start reading other teams’ plans, and get involved when your expertise can help.</p>
      <p class="subsq">When I joined Uber, a new world opened to me, thanks to its transparent RFC culture. I learned a lot about how other teams worked, just from reading their RFCs, and forged connections with teams by getting in touch with them via an RFC, when I had the expertise and interest to contribute. Your influence and your network are connected; there are few more fun ways to grow your network than by contributing to interesting planning docs, learning something new, and helping fellow engineers along the way.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Take part in cross-team projects. </b>If the only people you collaborate with are teammates, then your influence will be limited to your team. To build trust with people beyond your team, work and build relationships while expanding your understanding. When you’re comfortable on your team, seek opportunities to get involved in projects with different engineering teams and non-engineering teams.</p>
      <p class="subsq">I’ve found that one of the best ways to network is by not “networking” at all. Instead, just work on a shared problem. For example, at Uber, some of my strongest connections were built by working on projects which involved talking daily with other engineers, managers, product managers, or designers, to get something important done.</p>
      <p class="implicit-break"></p>
      <p class="first first-in-section first-full-width"><b><span class="first-phrase">‘Promote’</span> your work – without boasting</b></p>
      <p class="subsq">Make sure your peers and manager know when you do great work. I’m not suggesting to be pushy about this. However, if you have team meetings where people showcase what they do, then why not present your progress and wins, too? If your team presents at a larger meeting, volunteer to talk about areas you’ve worked on.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Keep track of work you do and share it with your manager, every now and then, via a format like the work log we cover in the “Owning your career” chapter.</p>
      <p class="subsq"><b>Aim to build a strong personal brand. </b>Leonard Welter is a product manager at Bloomberg. He observed that engineers have “personal brands.” Here’s his advice:</p>
      <div class="blockquote-container prose without-attribution within-prose-element">
        <blockquote class="prose without-attribution within-prose-element">
        <p class="first blockquote-content blockquote-content-prose blockquote-position-first blockquote-position-last">“The concept of ’building a personal brand’ can be seen as a negative type of politics, especially when it reverts to style over substance. However, it is important to reflect on how you are perceived in the organization. Thinking about your ’brand’ is again something I wish someone took me through, early in my career. Is your ‘brand’ someone who is seen as getting things done? Or someone who has strong opinions, but rarely rolls their sleeves up? Results are not the only things that matter when it comes to this kind of brand.”</p>
      </blockquote>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="fewer-than-100-notes">
      <div class="endnotes">
        <div class="endnotes-separator">
        </div>
        <div>
          <div id="part-3-chapter-2-endnote-1-text" class="endnote-text"><p class="first"><span class="endnote-text-number"><a class="endnote-backlink" href="part-003-chapter-012.xhtml#part-3-chapter-2-endnote-1">1</a> </span><a class="content-external-link text-is-url" href="https://google.github.io/eng-practices/review">https://google.github.io/eng-practices/review</a></p>
          </div>
          <div id="part-3-chapter-2-endnote-2-text" class="endnote-text"><p class="first"><span class="endnote-text-number"><a class="endnote-backlink" href="part-003-chapter-012.xhtml#part-3-chapter-2-endnote-2">2</a> </span><a class="content-external-link text-is-url" href="https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/development/code_review.html">https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/development/code_review.html</a></p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
