<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
 "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xml:lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en">
<head>
  <title>Preface</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet"
        type="text/css"
        href="css/style.css" />
  <link rel="stylesheet"
        type="text/css"
        href="css/media.css" />
</head>
<body>
  <div id="preface" class="element element-non-bodymatter element-container-single element-type-preface element-with-heading">
    <div class="heading heading-container-single heading-size-full heading-format-full heading-alignment-flexible heading-without-image">
      <div class="heading-contents">
        <div class="title-subtitle-block title-block-without-element-number">
          <div class="element-number-block">
          </div>
          <div class="title-block">
            <h1 class="element-title case-upper">PREFACE</h1>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="text" id="preface-text">
      <p class="first first-in-chapter first-full-width">I’ve been a software engineer for about 10 years, and a manager for five more. During my first few years as a developer, I received little to no professional guidance. But I didn’t mind, as I assumed hard work would eventually lead to progress.</p>
      <p class="subsq">However, this changed a few years into my career when I was passed over for a promotion to a senior engineer role which I thought I was ready for. Not only that but when I asked my manager how I could get to that next level, they didn’t have any specific feedback. It was then that I decided that if I ever did become a manager, I’d always offer team members useful advice on how to grow.</p>
      <p class="subsq">It was when I was working at the riding-hailing app Uber that I became an engineering manager. By then I was a seasoned engineer, but I still remembered my earlier promise to myself. So, I did my best to support people on my team to improve professionally, get the promotions they deserved, and give clear, actionable feedback when I thought colleagues weren’t ready for the next level, just yet.</p>
      <p class="subsq">As my team grew and I took on skip-level reports, I had less and less time to mentor teammates in-depth. I also started to see patterns in the feedback I gave, so began to publish blog posts of the advice I found myself giving repeatedly; about writing well, and doing good code reviews. These posts were warmly received, and a lot more people than I expected read and shared them with colleagues. This is when I began writing this book.</p>
      <p class="subsq">By year two of the writing process, I had a draft that could be ready to publish. However, at that time I launched The Pragmatic Engineer Newsletter. The focus of this newsletter is keeping the pulse of today’s tech market, plus regular deepdives into how well-known, international companies operate, software engineering trends, and occasional interviews with interesting tech people. Writing the newsletter made me realize just how many “gaps” were in the book draft. The past two years have been spent rewriting and honing its contents, one chapter at a time.</p>
      <p class="subsq">After four years of writing, I can say with conviction that “The Software Engineer’s Guidebook” and The Pragmatic Engineer Newsletter are complementary resources. This is despite the fact there is very little overlap in their contents.</p>
      <p class="subsq">Writing this book helped me kick off the newsletter because it was obvious there are plenty of timely software engineering topics to write about, which would make little sense to cover in a book with a longer lifespan than a weekly newsletter. The newsletter has helped me improve the book; I’ve learned lots about interesting trends and new tools that feel like they are here to stay for a decade or longer, such as AI coding tools, cloud development environments, and developer portals. These technologies are referenced in this book in much less detail than you will find in the newsletter.</p>
      <p class="subsq">I hope you discover useful ideas in this book, which serve you well for years to come.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
